README.md, before:

[👉 **Project page Here**](https://fhgomes.github.io/lightweight-spring-actuator-monitor)

[👉 **Use the Dashboard Here**](dashboard-monitor.html)

# 🚀 Lightweight Spring Actuator Monitor

A zero-setup HTML dashboard for monitoring Spring Boot Actuator metrics in real-time. 
Download, open in your browser, and start monitoring immediately.

This standalone dashboard transforms raw Actuator endpoints into an intuitive interface with live metrics, progress bars, 
and detailed explanations of what each metric means and when to take action. 
Perfect for development, debugging, and learning about JVM performance without the complexity of enterprise monitoring stacks.

## 🎯 Why This Project Exists

This dashboard was created to fill a specific need for a monitoring solution that balances simplicity with detailed insight. 
While many tools exist, they often fall short in one of these key areas:

**Simplicity and Zero-Friction Deployment**: Unlike enterprise monitoring stacks (Spring Boot Admin, Prometheus, Grafana, ELK), 
there's no infrastructure to set up, no configuration files to maintain, and no learning curve. 
It's a single HTML file that works anywhere—from local development to quick production troubleshooting.

**Transparency and Trust**: As a lightweight, open-source solution with readable code, developers can understand exactly 
how it works, customize it for their needs, and contribute improvements. No black boxes, no vendor lock-in, no hidden costs.

**Educational Value with Actionable Insights**: While tools like Spring Boot Admin show you the metrics, this dashboard 
explains what they mean, when to be concerned, and how to optimize. Each metric comes with context, thresholds, 
and practical JVM tuning advice—turning monitoring into a learning experience.

Whether you're debugging memory issues during development, demonstrating JVM behavior in a workshop, or need quick insights 
without spinning up a full monitoring stack, this tool bridges the gap between "too simple" and "too complex."

Perfect for developers who value pragmatic solutions over enterprise complexity.

## 🔒 Data Safety & Privacy

### Zero Data Storage
- **100% Client-Side:** All operations happen in your browser
- **No Backend Server:** Pure HTML/CSS/JavaScript implementation
- **No Data Collection:** Your metrics are never stored or transmitted anywhere
- **No Cookies:** No tracking, no storage, no persistence
- **Direct Communication:** Dashboard connects directly to your Spring Boot Actuator endpoints

### Security Considerations
- **Local Processing:** All data processing happens locally in your browser
- **No Third-Party Services:** No external dependencies or CDNs
- **Transparent Code:** Single HTML file with readable, unobfuscated code
- **CORS Aware:** Respects your Spring Boot application's CORS settings
- **Network Safety:** Only connects to the Actuator URL you specify

## ✨ Current Features

- **Real-time monitoring** of JVM memory, CPU, and GC metrics
- **Zero dependencies** - pure HTML/CSS/JavaScript
- **Auto-refresh** with configurable intervals
- **Detailed explanations** for each metric with optimization tips
- **Responsive design** that works on desktop and mobile
- **Easy setup** - just point to your Spring Boot application

## 🔮 Future Features

Check out our live development progress on the [GitHub Project Board](https://github.com/users/fhgomes/projects/1/views/1)

### Multi-Server Monitoring
- **Multiple Server Support** - Monitor several Spring Boot applications simultaneously
- **Server Groups** - Organize servers by environment or application type
- **Consolidated View** - Compare metrics across different instances

### Enhanced Memory Analysis
- **Detailed Memory Breakdown** - Visualize different memory areas (Eden, Survivor, Old Gen)
- **Memory Pool Analysis** - Track individual memory pool usage and trends
- **Non-Heap Metrics** - Detailed Metaspace and Code Cache monitoring

### Alerts
- **Notification Support** - Send alerts to Browser
- **Notification Support** - Send alerts to other tools, Slack, Discord, or other messaging services
- **Customizable Alerts** - Set thresholds for each metric and receive alerts when they're exceeded

### Advanced Analytics
- **Historical Trending** - Track metric patterns over time
- **Predictive Alerts** - Get early warnings based on metric trends
- **Performance Insights** - Automated suggestions for JVM optimization
- **Custom Dashboards** - Create views tailored to specific monitoring needs

### Security & Privacy Enhancements
- **Optional Local Storage** - Save your configuration locally with clear user consent and control
- **Encryption Support** - Optional encryption for any locally stored data
- **Security Headers Configuration** - Help configure security headers for your Spring Boot application
- **Access Control Templates** - Pre-configured security settings for different environments
- **Security Audit Mode** - Scan and suggest security improvements for your Actuator setup
- **Privacy Dashboard** - Clear visualization of all data handling and storage options

### Visual Customization
- **Clean Mode** - Switch to a clean theme for better visibility
- **Dark Mode** - Switch to a dark theme for better visibility
- **Custom Colors** - Choose your own colors for each metric
- **Custom Icons** - Replace the default icons with your own
- **Custom Logos** - Add your own company logo to the dashboard
- 
### Customization Features
- **Configurable Metrics** - Choose which metrics to display and track
- **Custom Thresholds** - Set alert levels based on your application's needs
- **Layout Customization** - Arrange metrics and charts to suit your workflow
- **Theme Support** - Choose between light/dark modes and custom colors

### Coming Soon
We're actively working on these features, prioritizing them based on community feedback.
Want to contribute or influence what gets built next? Check out our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) 
or join the discussion in our [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/fhgomes/lightweight-spring-actuator-monitor/issues).

## 📊 Supported Metrics

- **Memory**: Heap Used/Max, Non-Heap Usage
- **Performance**: CPU Usage, Live Threads
- **Garbage Collection**: Memory Allocated
- **Progress bars** showing memory utilization

## 🚀 Quick Start

1. **Download** the HTML file from this repository
2. **Open** it in any modern web browser
3. **Configure** your Spring Boot application URL (default: http://localhost:8080)
4. **Click Connect** and start monitoring!

### Prerequisites

Your Spring Boot application needs to have Actuator enabled:

1. Add the Actuator dependency to your `pom.xml`:
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-actuator</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

2. Basic configuration in your `application.yml` or `application.properties`:

```yaml
server:
  port: 8080  # Verify this matches the URL in the dashboard

management:
  endpoints:
    web:
      exposure:
        include: health,metrics
  endpoint:
    health:
      show-details: always
```

3. **Optional: CORS Configuration**

If you encounter access errors when trying to connect to your Spring Boot application from the dashboard, you'll need to enable CORS. Add this to your configuration:

```yaml
management:
  endpoints:
    web:
      cors:
        allowed-origins: "*"        # For development only
        allowed-methods: GET,POST
        allowed-headers: "*"
```

> ⚠️ Note: For production environments, replace "*" with specific allowed origins for better security.

## 🎯 Use Cases

- **Development** monitoring during local testing
- **Quick debugging** of memory issues
- **Learning** about JVM metrics and their meanings
- **Lightweight alternative** to heavy monitoring solutions
- **Demo purposes** for Spring Boot applications

## 📱 Screenshots

*Coming soon - add screenshots of the dashboard here*

## 🔧 Configuration

The dashboard automatically detects and displays:
- JVM Memory metrics (heap/non-heap)
- System CPU usage
- Thread information
- Garbage Collection statistics

Simply change the "Actuator URL" field to point to your Spring Boot application.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see our [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

### Quick Contribution Steps
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'feat: add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙋‍♂️ Support

- **Issues**: Report bugs or request features via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/fhgomes/lightweight-spring-actuator-monitor/issues)
- **Discussions**: Join conversations in [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/fhgomes/lightweight-spring-actuator-monitor/discussions)

## ⭐ Show Your Support

If this project helped you, please consider giving it a star! ⭐

## 🔗 Related Projects

- [Spring Boot Actuator](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/html/actuator.html)
- [Spring Boot Admin](https://github.com/codecentric/spring-boot-admin)
- [Micrometer](https://micrometer.io/)

---

**Made with ❤️ for the Spring Boot community**

---

## 📋 Version Control

**Current Version:** v1.1.0  
**Release Date:** 2025-09-23  
**Last Updated:** 2025-09-23  

### Version History
- **v1.1.0** (2025-09-23) - Enhanced UI organization and documentation
  - Improved controls layout and accessibility
  - Added detailed "All Metrics" section with Memory and CPU tabs
  - Enhanced documentation with semantic versioning
  - Standardized contribution guidelines
  
- **v1.0.0** (2025-01-16) - Initial release with core monitoring features
  - Real-time JVM memory, CPU, and GC metrics
  - Zero-dependency HTML dashboard
  - Educational tooltips and optimization tips
  - Responsive design for desktop and mobile

---

**Creator:** [fhgomes](https://github.com/fhgomes/fhgomes)  
**Contact:** tech.fernando.gomes@gmail.com

Commit message:

[ref #5] docs: improve documentation quality and AI instructions structure
- Fix notification feature descriptions in README.md for clarity
- Remove empty bullet point from Visual Customization section
- Refactor .ai-instructions.md to serve as clean entry point
- Update AI changelog to version 1.1.1 with comprehensive change tracking
- Eliminate redundancy between entry-level and detailed AI documentation
- Enhance navigation to comprehensive guidance in .ai/ directory

This update improves documentation consistency, reduces maintenance burden,
and provides clearer hierarchy for AI-assisted development guidance.

README.md, after:

[👉 **Project page Here**](https://fhgomes.github.io/lightweight-spring-actuator-monitor)

[👉 **Use the Dashboard Here**](dashboard-monitor.html)

# 🚀 Lightweight Spring Actuator Monitor

A zero-setup HTML dashboard for monitoring Spring Boot Actuator metrics in real-time. 
Download, open in your browser, and start monitoring immediately.

This standalone dashboard transforms raw Actuator endpoints into an intuitive interface with live metrics, progress bars, 
and detailed explanations of what each metric means and when to take action. 
Perfect for development, debugging, and learning about JVM performance without the complexity of enterprise monitoring stacks.

## 🎯 Why This Project Exists

This dashboard was created to fill a specific need for a monitoring solution that balances simplicity with detailed insight. 
While many tools exist, they often fall short in one of these key areas:

**Simplicity and Zero-Friction Deployment**: Unlike enterprise monitoring stacks (Spring Boot Admin, Prometheus, Grafana, ELK), 
there's no infrastructure to set up, no configuration files to maintain, and no learning curve. 
It's a single HTML file that works anywhere—from local development to quick production troubleshooting.

**Transparency and Trust**: As a lightweight, open-source solution with readable code, developers can understand exactly 
how it works, customize it for their needs, and contribute improvements. No black boxes, no vendor lock-in, no hidden costs.

**Educational Value with Actionable Insights**: While tools like Spring Boot Admin show you the metrics, this dashboard 
explains what they mean, when to be concerned, and how to optimize. Each metric comes with context, thresholds, 
and practical JVM tuning advice—turning monitoring into a learning experience.

Whether you're debugging memory issues during development, demonstrating JVM behavior in a workshop, or need quick insights 
without spinning up a full monitoring stack, this tool bridges the gap between "too simple" and "too complex."

Perfect for developers who value pragmatic solutions over enterprise complexity.

## 🔒 Data Safety & Privacy

### Zero Data Storage
- **100% Client-Side:** All operations happen in your browser
- **No Backend Server:** Pure HTML/CSS/JavaScript implementation
- **No Data Collection:** Your metrics are never stored or transmitted anywhere
- **No Cookies:** No tracking, no storage, no persistence
- **Direct Communication:** Dashboard connects directly to your Spring Boot Actuator endpoints

### Security Considerations
- **Local Processing:** All data processing happens locally in your browser
- **No Third-Party Services:** No external dependencies or CDNs
- **Transparent Code:** Single HTML file with readable, unobfuscated code
- **CORS Aware:** Respects your Spring Boot application's CORS settings
- **Network Safety:** Only connects to the Actuator URL you specify

## ✨ Current Features

- **Real-time monitoring** of JVM memory, CPU, and GC metrics
- **Zero dependencies** - pure HTML/CSS/JavaScript
- **Auto-refresh** with configurable intervals
- **Detailed explanations** for each metric with optimization tips
- **Responsive design** that works on desktop and mobile
- **Easy setup** - just point to your Spring Boot application

## 🔮 Future Features

Check out our live development progress on the [GitHub Project Board](https://github.com/users/fhgomes/projects/1/views/1)

### Multi-Server Monitoring
- **Multiple Server Support** - Monitor several Spring Boot applications simultaneously
- **Server Groups** - Organize servers by environment or application type
- **Consolidated View** - Compare metrics across different instances

### Enhanced Memory Analysis
- **Detailed Memory Breakdown** - Visualize different memory areas (Eden, Survivor, Old Gen)
- **Memory Pool Analysis** - Track individual memory pool usage and trends
- **Non-Heap Metrics** - Detailed Metaspace and Code Cache monitoring

### Alerts
- **Browser Notifications** - Send alerts directly to your browser
- **Third-Party Integrations** - Send alerts to Slack, Discord, or other messaging services
- **Customizable Alerts** - Set thresholds for each metric and receive alerts when they're exceeded

### Advanced Analytics
- **Historical Trending** - Track metric patterns over time
- **Predictive Alerts** - Get early warnings based on metric trends
- **Performance Insights** - Automated suggestions for JVM optimization
- **Custom Dashboards** - Create views tailored to specific monitoring needs

### Security & Privacy Enhancements
- **Optional Local Storage** - Save your configuration locally with clear user consent and control
- **Encryption Support** - Optional encryption for any locally stored data
- **Security Headers Configuration** - Help configure security headers for your Spring Boot application
- **Access Control Templates** - Pre-configured security settings for different environments
- **Security Audit Mode** - Scan and suggest security improvements for your Actuator setup
- **Privacy Dashboard** - Clear visualization of all data handling and storage options

### Visual Customization
- **Clean Mode** - Switch to a clean theme for better visibility
- **Dark Mode** - Switch to a dark theme for better visibility
- **Custom Colors** - Choose your own colors for each metric
- **Custom Icons** - Replace the default icons with your own
- **Custom Logos** - Add your own company logo to the dashboard

### Customization Features
- **Configurable Metrics** - Choose which metrics to display and track
- **Custom Thresholds** - Set alert levels based on your application's needs
- **Layout Customization** - Arrange metrics and charts to suit your workflow
- **Theme Support** - Choose between light/dark modes and custom colors

### Coming Soon
We're actively working on these features, prioritizing them based on community feedback.
Want to contribute or influence what gets built next? Check out our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) 
or join the discussion in our [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/fhgomes/lightweight-spring-actuator-monitor/issues).

## 📊 Supported Metrics

- **Memory**: Heap Used/Max, Non-Heap Usage
- **Performance**: CPU Usage, Live Threads
- **Garbage Collection**: Memory Allocated
- **Progress bars** showing memory utilization

## 🚀 Quick Start

1. **Download** the HTML file from this repository
2. **Open** it in any modern web browser
3. **Configure** your Spring Boot application URL (default: http://localhost:8080)
4. **Click Connect** and start monitoring!

### Prerequisites

Your Spring Boot application needs to have Actuator enabled:

1. Add the Actuator dependency to your `pom.xml`:
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-actuator</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

2. Basic configuration in your `application.yml` or `application.properties`:

```yaml
server:
  port: 8080  # Verify this matches the URL in the dashboard

management:
  endpoints:
    web:
      exposure:
        include: health,metrics
  endpoint:
    health:
      show-details: always
```

3. **Optional: CORS Configuration**

If you encounter access errors when trying to connect to your Spring Boot application from the dashboard, you'll need to enable CORS. Add this to your configuration:

```yaml
management:
  endpoints:
    web:
      cors:
        allowed-origins: "*"        # For development only
        allowed-methods: GET,POST
        allowed-headers: "*"
```

> ⚠️ Note: For production environments, replace "*" with specific allowed origins for better security.

## 🎯 Use Cases

- **Development** monitoring during local testing
- **Quick debugging** of memory issues
- **Learning** about JVM metrics and their meanings
- **Lightweight alternative** to heavy monitoring solutions
- **Demo purposes** for Spring Boot applications

## 📱 Screenshots

*Coming soon - add screenshots of the dashboard here*

## 🔧 Configuration

The dashboard automatically detects and displays:
- JVM Memory metrics (heap/non-heap)
- System CPU usage
- Thread information
- Garbage Collection statistics

Simply change the "Actuator URL" field to point to your Spring Boot application.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please see our [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

### Quick Contribution Steps
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'feat: add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🙋‍♂️ Support

- **Issues**: Report bugs or request features via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/fhgomes/lightweight-spring-actuator-monitor/issues)
- **Discussions**: Join conversations in [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/fhgomes/lightweight-spring-actuator-monitor/discussions)

## ⭐ Show Your Support

If this project helped you, please consider giving it a star! ⭐

## 🔗 Related Projects

- [Spring Boot Actuator](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/html/actuator.html)
- [Spring Boot Admin](https://github.com/codecentric/spring-boot-admin)
- [Micrometer](https://micrometer.io/)

---

**Made with ❤️ for the Spring Boot community**

---

## 📋 Version Control

**Current Version:** v1.1.0  
**Release Date:** 2025-09-23  
**Last Updated:** 2025-09-23  

### Version History
- **v1.1.0** (2025-09-23) - Enhanced UI organization and documentation
  - Improved controls layout and accessibility
  - Added detailed "All Metrics" section with Memory and CPU tabs
  - Enhanced documentation with semantic versioning
  - Standardized contribution guidelines
  
- **v1.0.0** (2025-01-16) - Initial release with core monitoring features
  - Real-time JVM memory, CPU, and GC metrics
  - Zero-dependency HTML dashboard
  - Educational tooltips and optimization tips
  - Responsive design for desktop and mobile

---

**Creator:** [fhgomes](https://github.com/fhgomes/fhgomes)  
**Contact:** tech.fernando.gomes@gmail.com
